Now we examine the issue of missing data (NA, NaN, and empty strings). We first notice multiple variables
with empty strings. Therefore, we alter them to NAs so that we can deal with the issue of missing data all
at once.
When examining the potential impact of missing data on our results, it is important to consider the underlying
reasons why they are missing in the first place, before attempting a solution. Generally missing data is
classified into three fashions.
• Missing completely at random (MCAR): This occurs when the data missing are independent of the
observed and unobserved data. There is no systematic differences that exist between the observations
with missing information and those with complete data. In many cases of MCAR, the missing data
simply reduce the analyzable population and statistical power, without introducing bias. The remaining
data can simply be considered a random sample of the full data set in question.
• Missing at random (MAR): This occurs when data are missing systematically in relation to the observed
and not the unobserved data. Generally, the missingness while due to the observed, can still be predicted
from other information about the observation.
• Missing not at random (MNAR): This occurs when there is systematically missing data related to the
unobserved or the missingness is directly related to factors which have not been measured or researched
in the study. For example, in this data set multiple variables have greater than 90% missing due to the
data being related/specific to trucks/flatbeds only and not general cars. If observations are not truck
owners, they are unlikely to be represented in variables/attributes pertaining to only trucks. Similar
to MAR data, complete cases containing MNAR may not always results in bias if those complete cases
are biased. However, due to the missing data being unmeasured, it is difficult to address this and will
likely lead to biased estimates in prediction.
When dealing this these types of missing data, our options generally include removal of the data, imputation,
or simply leaving them alone. In the case of this data set 6% of the total data was missing, with a mixture
of MCAR, MAR, and MNAR. For the MNAR data, these variables were over 90% missing, so we simply
elect to drop the variables, as imputation would be statistically inappropriate here and would introduce bias
and unreliable estimates. The remaining variables with NAs showed only small (less than 5%) percentages
of missing data, and without justifiable reasons for imputation, we elected to leave the NAs present as our
models are capable of handling NAs.
